the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu
so you know basically the last few weeks
we've been doing derivatives now we're
going to do integral
[Music]
[Applause]
so okay so more precisely we're going to
be talking about double
integrals okay
so just to motivate the
notion let me just remind you that when
you have a function of one
variable say F
ofx and if you take its
integral from say A to B of f ofx
DX well that corresponds to the
area
below the graph of
F over the interval from A to
B okay so the
picture is something
like you have a you have B you have the
graph of
F
and then with the integral
measures is the
area of the this
region and when we say the area of this
region of course if f is positive that's
what happens if f is negative then we
count negatively the area below the
x-axis so now when you have a function
of two
variables then you can try to do the
same thing namely you can plot its graph
its graph will be a surface in space and
then we can try to look for the volume
below the graph and that's what we will
call the double integ
of a function over a certain
region okay
so let's say that we have a
function of two variables X and
Y then we'll look at the volume that's
below the
graph Z equals f of x y
okay
so let's dra a picture for what this
means I have a function of X and Y I can
draw its graph the graph will be you
know the surface with equation Z equals
f of x and
y and while I have to decide where I
will integrate the function so for that
I will choose some region in the XY
plane
and I will integrate the function on
that
region so it's over a region R in the XY
plane so I have this region R and I look
at the piece of the graph that is above
this
region and we'll try to compute the
volume of this solid
here okay that's what the double
integral will
measure so we'll call
that the double integral of our Orion R
of f of XY d a and I will have to
explain what the notation means so da
here stands for a piece of area a stands
for
area and well it's a double integral so
that's why we have two integral signs
and we'll have have to indicate somehow
the region over which we're integrating
okay we'll come up with more concrete
notations when we see how to actually
compute these things but that's the
basic
definition okay so actually how do well
I mean that's not really much of a
definition yet how do we actually you
know Define this
rigorously well remember the integral in
one variable you probably saw a
definition where you take your interval
from A to B and you cut it into little
pieces and then for each little piece
you take the value of the function and
you multiply by the width of the piece
that gives you a
rectangular slice and then you sum all
of these rectangular slices together so
here we'll do the same
thing okay so well let me put a picture
up and explain what it
does so we are going to cut our region
into little pieces say little rectangles
or actually anything we want
and then for each
piece with a small area Delta a we'll
take the area Delta a times the value of
a function in there that will give us
the volume of a small box that sits
under the graph and then we'll add all
these boxes together that gives us an
estimate of the volume and then to get
actually the integral the integral will
be defined as a limit as we subdivide
into smaller and smaller boxes and we
sum more and more
pieces okay
so actually what we do oh I still have a
I still have a board
here
so the actual
definition
involves cutting R into small
pieces of area that's called Delta a
maybe Delta a i the area of the if pce
and
then okay so maybe in the XY
plane we have our region and we'll cut
it maybe using some
grid okay and then we'll have each small
piece each small piece will have
AA Delta
a Delta a i and it will be at some
point let's call it x i
Yi y i x
i and then we'll consider the sum over
all the
pieces of F at that point x i y i times
the area of a small
piece so what that corresponds to in the
threedimensional picture is just I sum
the volumes of all of the little columns
that sit under the
graph okay and
then so what I do is actually I take the
limit as the you know the size of the
pieces tends to zero so I have more and
more smaller and smaller
pieces
and that gives me the double
integral okay Sor that's not a very good
sentence but
whatever
so okay so that's the definition of
course we'll have to see how to compute
it we don't actually compute it you know
when you compute an integral in single
variable calculus you don't do that you
don't cut into little pieces and sum the
pieces together you've learned how to
integrate functions using various
formulas and similar here we'll learn
how to actually compute these things
without doing that cutting into small
pieces but okay any questions first
about the concept or what the definition
is
yes well so we'll have to learn which
tricks work and how exactly but so what
we'll do actually is we'll reduce the
calculation of a double integral to two
calculations of single integrals and so
for these certainly all the tricks
you've learned in single variable
calculus will come in
handy okay so yes that's a strong signal
by the way that if you forgotten
everything about single variable
calculus now might be a good time to
actually brush up on you know
integrals
um you know the usual integrals and the
usual substition substitution tricks and
easy trig in particular this will be
very
useful okay so yes so how do we compute
these things that's what we have to come
up with
and
well you know going back to what we did
with derivatives to understand
variations of functions and derivatives
what we did was really we took slices
parallel to an excess or another one so
in fact here the key is also the same so
what we're going to do is instead of
cutting into a lot of small boxes like
that and summing completely at random
will actually somehow scan our region
scan through our by planes okay so let
me put up actually a slightly different
picture up
here so what I'm going to do is I'm
going to take planes say in the specture
parallel to the YZ plane I'll take a
moving plane that scans from the back to
the front or from the front to the
back so that means you know I set a
value of x0 of X and I I look at the
slice xals x0 and then I will do that
for all values of x0 so now in each
slice well I get what looks a lot like a
single variable integral okay and that
integral will tell me what is the area
in this well I guess was supposed to be
green but it all comes as black so uh
let's say the black shaded
slice and then when I add all of these
areas together as the value of x changes
I will get the
volume okay let me try to explain that
again
so to
compute this integral what we do is
actually we
take
slices
so let's consider let's call S of X the
area of a
slice
through well by um
by a plane parallel to the YZ
plane okay so on the picture s of X is
just the area of this thing in the in
the vertical
wall now if you sum all of these well
let's see why does that work so if you
take the region between two parallel
slices that are very close to each each
other what's the volume between these
two things well it's essentially s of X
the thickness of this very slice and the
thickness would be Delta X or DX if you
take a limit with more and more
slices okay
so then the
volume will be the integral of s of X
DX from well what would be the range for
X well we would have to start at the
very lowest value of x that ever happens
in our region and we' have to go all the
way to the very largest value of x okay
from the very far back to the very far
front so on this picture we probably
start you know over here at the back and
with end over here at the
front
so let me just say from you know the
minimum x to the maximum
X and now how do we find S of X well s
of X will be actually again an integral
but now it's an integral over the
variable y because when we look at this
slice what changes from left to height
is
y
so
well let me actually write that
down for a given
X the area s of X you can compute as an
integral of f of
XY
Dy okay well now X is a constant and Y
will be the variable of
integration what are what's the range
for y well it's from you know the
leftmost point here to the rightmost
point here on the given
slice so there's a big catch here that's
a very important thing to
remember what is the range of
integration the range of integration for
y depends actually on X see if I took a
slice if I take this slice that's
pictured on that diagram then the range
for y goes all the way from the very
left to the very right but if I take a
slice that say near the very front
then in fact only a very small segment
of it will be in my region so the range
of values for y will be much less let me
actually draw a 2d picture of
it so remember we fix X and we VAR sorry
so we fix a value of
x okay and for a given value of x what
we'll do is we'll slice our graph by
this plane parallel to the YZ plane so
now imagine the graph is sitting above
that and that's the region
R I have the region R and I'm I have the
graph of a function above this region
R and I'm trying to find the area
between this segment and the graph above
it in this vertical
plane well to do that I have to
integrate from
y for y going
from here to
here right I want the area of a piece
that sits above this red segment and so
in particular the end points the extreme
values for y depend on X because see if
I slice here
instead well my bounce for y will be
smaller okay so now if I put the two
things together what I will get
is
actually a formula where I have to
integrate over
X an
integral over
y
okay and so this is called an iterated
integral
because we iterate twice the process of
taking an
integral okay so
again what's important to realize here I
mean I'm going to save at several times
over the next few days but that's
because it's the single most important
thing to remember about double
integrals the bounds here are just going
to be numbers okay
because the question that I'm asking
myself here is what is the first value
of x by which I might want to slice and
what is the last value of x you know
which range of X do I want to look at to
take my red slices and the answer is I
would go all the way from here that's my
first
slice
to somewhere here that's my last
slice for any value in between these I
will have some sort some red segment and
I will want to integrate over that on
the other hand here the bounce will
depend on the outer variable
X because if I fix a value of x what the
values of Y will be depends on X in
general okay so I think probably we
should do lots of examples to convince
ourselves you know and see how it
[Music]
works
sorry yeah it's it's called an iterated
integral because first we integrate Y
and then we integrate again over X
okay so we can do that
well I mean y depends on X or X depends
no actually X and Y vary independently
of each other inside here
what is more complicated is how the
bounds on y depend on X but actually you
could also do it the other way around
first integrate over X and then over Y
and then the bounce for X would depend
on y we'll see that on an example yes
for your y
[Music]
values so for y I'm using the range of
values for y that corresponds to the
given value of
x okay remember this is just like a plot
in the XY plane above that we have the
graph maybe I should draw a picture here
instead for a given value of x so that's
a given slice I have a range of values
for y that is from you know in this
picture it's the leftmost point on that
slice to the rightmost point on that
slice so where I start and where I stop
depends on the value of
x does that make
sense kind of okay
okay uh no more
questions no
okay so let's do a first
example so let's say that we want to
integrate the function 1 minus
xus
y^2 over the
region
defined by X between 0 and 1 and y
between 0 and
one so what does that mean
geometrically well Z = 1 - X2 - y^ 2 and
it's a variation on you know something I
think actually we've plotted that one
right when we that was our first example
of a function of two variables
possibly and so we saw that the graph is
this paraboloid pointing downwards okay
it's what you get by taking a parabol
Parabola and rotating it and now what
we're asking is what is the volume
between the paraboloid and the XY plane
over the square of side one in the XY
plane X and Y between 0 and
one okay so what we'll do is
we'll so see here I've tried to
represent the square and we'll just
sum the areas of the for slices as say x
varies from 0 to
one and here of course setting up a
bounds will be easy because no matter
what x I take y still goes from Z to
one see it's easiest to do double
integrals when the region is just a
rectangle in the XY plane because then
you don't have to worry too much about
what are the
ranges okay
so let's do it well that would
be the integral from 0 to 1 of the
integral from 0 to
1 of 1 - x - y^ 2 Dy DX okay so I'm
dropping the parentheses but if you
still want to see them I'm going to put
them in you know very
thin so that you see what it means but
actually the convention is we won't put
these parentheses in there
anymore okay so what this means is first
I will integrate 1 - x - y^ 2 over y
ranging from 0 to 1 with X held fixed so
what that represents is the area in this
slice so see here actually I've drawn
well what happens is actually the
function takes positive and negative
values so in fact I will be counting
positively this part of the area and I
will be counting negatively this part of
the area I mean as usual when I do an
integral
so what I
will do to evaluate
this I will first do What's called the
inner
integral so to do the inner integral
well it's pretty
easy how do I integrate
this well
becomes so what's the integral of one
it's y just the only thing to remember
is we're integrating with respect to y
not to X okay the integral of x s
is x 2 *
Y and the integral of y^2
is y cubed over
3 okay and then we plug in the bounds
which are zero and one in this
case and so when you plug y = 1 you will
get 1 - x^2 -
1/3
minus well for y = 0 you get 0 0 0 so
nothing changes because you're left with
2/3 minus
x^2 okay and that's a function of X only
here you shouldn't see any y's anymore
because y was your integration variable
but you still have X you still have X
because the area of this shaded slice
depends of course on the value of x
and so now the second thing to do is to
do the outer
integral so now we integrate from 0 to
1 what we got which is 2/3 -
x^2
DX okay and we know how to compute that
because that integrates to 2/3 xus 1/3 x
cubed between 0 and 1 and I let you do
the computation you will find it's
1/3 okay so that's the final
answer so that's the general pattern see
we when we have a double integral to
compute first we want to set it up
carefully we want to find what will be
the bounds in X and Y and here that was
actually pretty easy because our region
was very
simple then we want to compute the inner
integral and then we compute the outer
integral and that's
it okay any questions at this
point
no okay so by the way we started with a
DA in the notation right here we had
da and that somehow became a Dy
DX Okay so
so da a became Dy DX because when we do
the iterated integral this way what
we're actually doing is that we're
slicing our region into small
rectangles Okay now what's the area of
this small rectangle here well it's the
product of its width time its height so
that's Delta X time Delta y
okay so Delta a equals Delta X Delta y
became so actually it's not just becomes
it's really
equal for the small rectangles
for um now it became dydx not DX d y
well that's a question of in which order
we do the iterated integral it's up to
us to decide whether we want to
integrate x first then y or Y first then
X but as we'll see very soon that is an
important decision when it comes to
setting up the bounds of integration
here it doesn't matter but in general we
have to be very careful about in which
order we'll do
things
yes will always work sorry yeah it well
in principle it always works both ways
sometimes it will be that you know
because the region has a strange shape
you can actually set it up more easily
one way than the other sometimes it will
also be that the function here you
actually know how to integrate in one
way but not the other so the theory is
that it should work both ways in
practice one of the two calculations may
be much
harder
okay
let's do another
example let's say that what I wanted to
know was you know not actually what I
computed namely the volume below the
paraboloid but also the negative of some
part that's you know in the corner
towards me but let's say really what I
wanted was just the volume between the
paraboloid and the XY plane so looking
only at the part of it that sits above
the XY plane so that means instead of
integrating over the entire square of
size one I should just integrate over
the quarter disk right I should stop
integrating where my paraboloid hits the
XY plane so let me draw another
picture so let's say I wanted to
integrate
actually
so let's call this example two
sorry so it's the same we're going to do
the same function but over a different
region and the region will just be
now this quarter dis here okay so maybe
I
should draw a picture in the XY
plane that's my new region r
okay so in principle it will be the same
integral but what changes is the
bounds why do the bounds change while
the bounds change because now if I set
if I fix some value of x then I will
want to integrate this part of the slice
that's above the XY plane and I don't
want to take this part that's actually
outside of my dis so I should stop
integrating over y when y reaches this
value
here okay on that picture
here on this picture it tells me for a
fixed value of x the range of values for
y should go only from here to here so
that's from here to less than
one okay
so for given
X the
range of
Y is
well so what's the lowest value of y
that I will want to look at it's still
Zero from y equal Z to what's the value
of y here well I have to solve in the
equation of a circle
okay
so if I'm here this is X2 + Y2 = 1 that
means Y is square root of 1 - x^
2 okay so I will integrate from y = 0 to
Y = < TK of 1 -
x^2 and now you see how the Bound for y
will depend on the value of
x okay so while I erase I will let you
think about what is the Bound for X
now it's a trick
[Music]
question
okay
so I claim that what we'll
do so we'll write this as an iterated
integral first Dy then
DX and we said for a fixed value of x
the range for y is from 0 to sare root
of 1us x
s what about the range for X well the
range for X should just be numbers okay
remember the question I have to ask now
is if I look at all of these yellow
slices which one is the first one that I
want to consider which one is the last
one that I want to consider so the
smallest value of x that I want to
is zero again and then I will have there
I will actually have a pretty big slice
and I will get smaller and smaller and
smaller slices and it stops I have to
stop when x equals 1 afterwards there's
nothing else to
integrate
so X goes from Zer to
one okay and
now see how in the inner integral the
bounds depend on X in the outer one you
just get numbers
because the questions that you have to
ask to set up this one and to set up
that one are different here the question
is if I fix a given X if I look at a
given slice what's the range for y here
the question is what's the First Slice
what is the last
slice does that make
sense everyone happy with it okay very
good so now how do we compute that
well we do the inner integral so that's
integral from 0 to square root of 1 - x^
2 of 1 - x 2 - y^ 2
Dy and well that integrates to y - x^2 y
- y Cub 3 from 0 to otk of 1 - x^
and then that
becomes well root of 1 - x^ 2 - x^ 2un
of 1 - x^ 2 - 1 - x 2 to the three
halves over three and actually if you
look at it for long enough see this is 1
- x 2 * sare root of 1 - x^ 2 so
actually that's
also so in fact that simplifies to 2/3
of 1 - x^2 to the
3es okay let me redo that
maybe slightly differently this was 1 -
x^ 2 * y
so 1 - x^ 2 * y becomes < TK 1 - x^ 2
oops X
minus YB 3 and then when I take yal 0 I
get Z so I don't subtract anything okay
so now you see this is 1 - x^2 to the
three halesus a thir of it so you're
left with
2/3
okay so that's the inner
integral the outer integral is integral
from 0 to 1 of 2/3 of
1 - X2 to the
3es
DX
and
well I let you see if you remember
single variable integrals by trying to
figure out how this actually comes out
to
be is it pi/ two or Pi 8
actually I think it's p
eight
H okay well I guess we have to do it
then I wrote something on my notes but
it's not very clear okay so how do we
compute this thing well we have to do
trig substitution that's the only way I
know to compute an integral like that
okay so we'll set x equal sin Theta and
then square root of 1 - x^2 will be
cosine Theta we're using sin square plus
cosine Square equal
1 and so that will
become so 2/3 remains 2/3 1 - x^ 2 to
the 3es becomes cosine Cub Theta
DX well s if x is sin Theta then DX is
cosine Theta D Theta so that's cosine
Theta D Theta and well if you do things
subtitution the way I do them then you
should worry about the bounce for Theta
which will be 0 to pi/ 2 or you can you
know also just plug in the bounce at the
end um so now you have
the 2/3 time the integral from 0 to Pi /
2 of cosine to 4 Theta D
Theta and how do you integrate that well
you have to use double angle
formulas okay so cosine to the 4
remember cosine Square Theta
is 1 + cosine 2 Theta over 2 and we want
the square of
it and so that will give
us of well we'll
have actually
qu+ 12 cosine 2 Theta + 1 cosine S 2
Theta D
Theta and how will you handle this guy
while using again for double angle
formula okay so it's getting slightly
nasty so but I don't know any simpler
solution except for one simpler solution
which is you have a table of integrals
of this form Inside thees
Yes uh no I don't think so because if
you take 1 12 * cosine half * 2 you will
still have a
half okay so if you do again the double
angle formula I think I'm not going to
bother to do
it I claim you will get at the
end Pi
over8 because I say
so so okay so
exercise continue calculating and get pi
over
8 okay now what does this show us well
this shows us us actually that this is
probably not the right way to do this
okay the right way to do this will be to
integrate it in polar coordinates and
that's what we'll learn how to do
tomorrow okay
so we'll actually see how to do it with
much less
trig
so that will be
easier in polar
coordinates so we'll see that
tomorrow okay so but you know we are
almost there I mean here you just use
the double angle again and then you can
get it and it's it's pretty
straightforward
okay so one thing that's kind of
interesting to
know is we can exchange the order of
integration so if we have an integral
given to us in the order Dy DX we can
switch it to DX Dy but we have to be
extremely careful with the
bounds see you certainly cannot just
swap the bounds of the inner and outer
because there you would end up you know
having this square root of 1 - x square
on the outside and you would never get a
number out of that so that cannot work
it's more complicated than that okay so
well here's a first baby
example certainly if I do integral from
0 to 1 integral from 0 to two DX
dy I can there I can certainly
switch the bounce without thinking too
much what's the reason for that well the
reason for that is you know this
corresponds in both cases to integrating
x from 0 to two and Y from 0 to 1 it's a
rectangle so if I slice it this way you
see that y goes from 0 to one for any X
between 0 and two it's this guy if I
slice
it that way then X goes from 0 to two
for any value of y between 0 and one and
it's this one so here it works but in
general I I have to draw a picture of my
region and see how the slices look like
both
ways okay so let's
do a more interesting
one let's say that I want to compute
integral from 0 to 1 of integral from X
to square root of x of e to the Y over Y
and Dy
DX so why did I choose this guy I choose
this guy because as far as I can tell
there's no way to integrate e to the Y
over
y so this is an integral but you cannot
compute this
way so it's a good example for why this
can be useful so if you do it this way
you're stuck immediately so instead
we'll try to switch the order but to
switch the order we have to understand
what do these bounds
mean okay so let's draw a picture of the
region
well what we're saying is y goes from y
= x to Y = root of x well let's
draw Y =
X and Y = square root of
x
it's well maybe I should
actually put this here y = x to Y = root
of
x okay and so I will go for each value
x I will go from yal X to Y = root of x
and I will do that for values of X that
go from xal
0 to xal 1 which happens to be exactly
where these things
intersect so my region will consist of
all this okay so now if I want to do it
the other around I have to decompose my
region the other way around I have
to so my goal now is to Rite this as an
integral well it's still the same
function it's still e to the Y over y
but now I want to integrate DX d y so
how do I integrate over X well I fix a
value of
y and for that value of y what's the
range for X well the range for X is from
here to
here okay what's the value of x here
let's start with the easy
one this is xal y what about this one
it's
xal X =
y^2 okay
so X goes from y^2 to Y and then what
about y well I have to start at the
bottom of my region that's yal 0 to the
top which is at yal 1 so y goes from 0
to
one so see switching the bounds is not
completely
obvious that took a little bit of
work but now that we've done that
well just to see how it goes it's
actually going to be much easier to
integrate
because in our
integral well what's the integral of e
to the y y with respect to X it's just
that time x
right
from X = y^2 to Y so that will be well
if I plug xal y I will get e to Y minus
if I plug x = y^ 2 I will get e to y y *
y^
2 the y *
y okay so now if I do the outer
integral I will have integral from 0 to
one of e to Yus y e to
y d y and that one actually is a little
bit easier
so we know how to integrate e to the Y
we don't quite know how to integrate y e
to the Y but let's
try so let's see what's the derivative
of y e to the
Y well by the product rule that 1 * e to
Y
plus 1 y * the derivative of e to the Y
is y e to Y so if we do okay let's put a
minus sign in
front well that's almost what we want
except we have a minus E to the Y
instead of a plus e to the Y so we need
to add 2 e to the Y and I claim that the
anti-derivative okay if you got lost you
can also do it by integrating by Parts
by taking the derivative of y and
integrating this guy um or the you know
that works just you know your first
guess would be maybe let's try minus y e
to the Y take the dative of that compare
see what you need to to do to fix and so
if you take that between Z and one you
will eventually get e minus
2 okay
so tomorrow we are going to see how to
do double integrals in polar coordinates
and also applications of double
integrals how to use use them for
interesting
things